---
title: ECS using archetypes
date: '2021-05-19'
categories:
  - Games
tags:
  - Games
  - C++
---

Code can be found [here](https://github.com/geranim0/boidsECS)

In university I had a course on video games, and I learned about a game engine pattern called ECS. This is my own toy implementation using archetypes. It is a work in progress, but the core of the metaprogramming is there.

# ECS
If you're not already familiar with ECS, it means Entity Component System, and is a AoS (Array of Structs) optimisation, used for both performance and maintenability reasons. It helps when you have millions of game objects by reducing cache misses, and helps with maintenability because all game functionality are in little functionality units called Systems.

# Archetypes
are a way to avoid having holes in our arrays. If we only have N arrays for our N components, then every entity that does not have all of the components is going to have a null value for this component. When iterating on our entities, the null value will waste memory and introduce more cache missses. For this reason, we group entities in archetypes, which are specialized to contain only the necessary arrays, eleminating null values.

# Design
For this project, I wanted to have the most things done at compile time. For this reason, the ECS class is templated with all of the archetypes and all systems, and uses cool TMP functions to minimize boilerplate. For example, take a look at the `tick()` which calls all systems.

```c++
	void tick()
	{
		foreach_tuple(
			[&](auto const& system) {
				foreach(system);
			}, systems);
	}

  template<typename Fn>
	void foreach(Fn&& fn)
	{
		foreach_inner<Fn, std::tuple<ArchetypeTs...>, gmeta::get_archs_from_system_t<gmeta::types_t<ArchetypeTs...>, Fn>>{}(std::forward<Fn>(fn), archetypes);
	}

	template<typename Fn, typename ArchetypesT, typename MatchingArchetypes>
	struct foreach_inner {};

	template<typename Fn, typename ArchetypesT, typename...MatchingArchetypes>
	struct foreach_inner<Fn, ArchetypesT, gmeta::types_t<MatchingArchetypes...>>
	{
		void operator()(Fn&& fn, ArchetypesT& archetypes)
		{
			(std::get<MatchingArchetypes>(archetypes).foreach(std::forward<Fn>(fn)), ...);
		}
	};
```

As your can see, nothing is hard coded. To add a system, just add the system to the list of template arguments to the ECS class. To add an archetype, same thing. Note: the template class specialization is a little trick to be able to pass multiple variadic template type parameters at the same time (normally only one is possible at the end of the list of template type parameters). I put some restrictions in there too: the types for my archetypes all need to be different because I use `std::tuple` and `std::get<T>` a lot in my implementation.

```c++
template<typename ArchetypeTs, typename SystemTs, typename Enable = void>
class ECS
{};

template<typename... ArchetypeTs, typename... SystemTs>
class ECS<gmeta::types_t<ArchetypeTs...>,
	gmeta::types_t<SystemTs...>, 
	std::enable_if_t<gmeta::gis_same<gmeta::true_t, gmeta::all_different_t<gmeta::types_t<ArchetypeTs...>>>::value>>
{
```

